---
layout: post
title: Can you trust your team?
---

# Can you trust my code?

Not too terribly long ago, a colleague of mine complained bitterly about
the unreadability of some of our team's project code -- namely, small
helper methods with what I'd always thought of as intention-revealing
names. To me this was a feature, not a bug, so I followed up: How could
it _possibly_ be a bad thing? Don't small functions with
intention-revealing names make code _easier_ to read, rather than
harder?

One of the culprits, it turned out, was a dirt-simple extension method
we'd written after getting sick of writing out the more verbose version
in hundreds of lines of test code:

{% highlight C# %}
public static TimeSpan Hrs(this int h)
{
    return new Timespan(h, 0, 0);
}
{% endhighlight %}

(We'd called it `Hrs` to avoid conflicts with FluentAssertions' `Hours`
helper -- turns out that if your domain involves scheduling you use this
stuff all over.)

When I asked how `4.Hrs()` was less readable than `new Timespan(4,0,0)`,
I got a delayed-blast eye-opener:

> When you run into methods like this that you don't recognize, that
> don't follow normal C# or .NET conventions that everyone can be
> expected to know, you have to stop and figure out what's going on.
> Maybe it's enough just to mouse over the symbol and let IntelliSense
> tell you what's getting returned, but often you have to go to the
> method declaration and see what it's actually doing. It could be
> anything, you don't know until you look.

I was there when this helper method was born, so my first reaction was
something on the order of "What kind of moron do you think writes an
`<int>.Hrs()` function that doesn't return exactly what you'd expect?!"
But I was chatting with a smart and experienced developer, so I took a
firm hold of my vocabulary and fumbled through the rest of the
conversation while half my brain tried to figure out what I was missing.

# Can you trust the names I give my methods?

This had happened shortly after my colleague joined the company. We'd
all been working in what you could charitably call an extensively legacy
codebase, with some modules reaching back into the dark ages and some
others written from whole cloth last week. The VS solution wasn't
exactly what you'd call well-organized.

How was anyone supposed to know, just by looking at the code, that
`Hrs()` was written by someone sensible?

There's the rub. We give things intention-revealing names because they
cut through the clutter and reveal conceptual intent _if you can believe
that they mean what they say_. That's not a given if you're wandering
around a twisty maze of static classes, some of which were written ten
years ago and some of which were written ten _hours_ ago. We had some
gruesome code lurking around in the dark corners of our codebase.

And for that matter, how is anyone supposed to _trust me to write
sensible code_ until I've earned that trust?

How can I prove that to you, if you've just joined my team as one of my
peers?

# Can you trust my decisions?

Of course, this cuts both ways.

Shortly after I'd joined one team, we were converging on Postgres as a
persistence layer for a new project. Someone from on high overruled us
and insisted that we use a document store instead. One of the reasons
given was that:

> ...traditional SQL databases expose too much programmatic
> functionaliy, so someone who doesn't know any better could implement
> business rules in something like triggers or stored procedures. That
> would make them hard to discover, hard to test, and hard to version
> control.

I was the noob in the room, so my first reaction was something on the
order of "If you don't trust me to not be that fucking stupid, why did
you hire me?" But that suspicion wasn't directed at _me_; it was
future-idiot-proofing, rooted in bitter experience. 

I also had more Postgres experience than anyone else in the room was
willing to admit to, but that was decidedly secondary to the level of
trust I'd built up if I wanted to influence the decision. And I can't
fault anyone for it -- I had just stepped into a situation where
everyone involved was gun-shy about creating more technical debt, and I
had yet to show that I could put those broader cultural concerns over my
own preference for a tool I liked and with which I was familiar.

# Trust is fundamental

Everything I do that makes agile software development come even close to
working is based on trust.

* When I review your code, I trust that you've made a best-effort
  attempt to write good tests and refactor away conceptual duplication,
  because there's not much chance I can understand the paths you've just
  coded through as well as you can -- I'm vanishingly unlikely to spot
  sins of omission
* When _you_ review _my_ code, I trust that you're checking the tests I
  wrote against whatever I just implemented, and that you're willing to
  call me out on anything that doesn't make sense to you
* When we estimate tickets before moving them into the "ready" column, I
  trust that you've read through the acceptance criteria and thought at
  least a little bit about how it should be done when you confidently
  assert "Two or three days, tops!" -- or when _I_ do, and you nod.
* And most everything else.

The thing is, I've never seen this addressed on _either_ side of the
coin when someone new joins a team. Not "How do we give this person the
opportunity to earn our trust?", and not "How do we show this person
that we're worthy of their trust?" either. It's just generally expected
to shake out through an implicit, ad-hoc process of "Well let's just try
not to be incompetents, dickbags, or both".

# And while I'm at it

One of the commonly-praised features of strongly-typed functional
programming is that you can often deduce a method's implementation from
its type signature. For example, in Haskell, `map` is typed like so:

{% highlight Haskell %}
map :: (a -> b) -> [a] -> [b]
{% endhighlight %}

Now that's pretty damn obvious if you've seen `map` before. You take a
function `f` from `a`s to `b`s, and a list of `a`s, and _obviously_ you
return a list of `f(a)`s. But do you _really?_ What if `map f A` maps to
`_|_` -- if it somehow never terminated? Or if it collected all the
`f(a)`s and randomized them before returning `[b]`?

That would be a terrible implementation of `map`, but either one would
fit the raw type signature. Sure looks like we'd want some common
conceptual ground in order to trust that J. Random Haskell Implementor
got `map` right.

The point is, the algebraic space of functions from `a -> b` to `[a]` to
`[b]` is pretty large. If we want to be able to deduce an implementation
-- or at least something vaguely resembling semantics -- from a type
declaration, we have to start out with a certain degree of trust. If I
say that I have a function from `a -> b`s to `[a]`s to `[b]`s, and
you're as skeptical of me as [Descartes was of his
senses](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Evil_demon), we're not going to
get very far.
